h2. Virtual machines: Vagrant with Ansible

* We use "Vagrant":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vagrant_(software) to configure virtual development environments. It is used as a wrapper around "VirtualBox":https://www.virtualbox.org/ virtualization software.
* "Ansible":https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ansible_(software) is a software platform for configuring and managing computers. We use it together with Vagrant for configuration management.

h3. Install VirtualBox

pre. https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads

pre. https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html

h3. Install Vagrant

pre. https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html

h3. Install Ansible (mac)

pre. $ brew install ansible


h2. Look for configuration examples on the "vagrant_ansible_examples":/vagrant_ansible_examples folder

To try the examples, just copy the files from the example you choose to your project base folder and do:


* Start the machine (The first time it will take some minutes to load everything)

pre. $ vagrant up

Note: Sometimes (depending of the Vagrantfile configuration, the script might ask you for your host machine password. This only happens if a private network and NFS shared folders are configured on the Vagrantfile.
This is a good practice for bigger projects because it speeds up the disk access on the shared folders.

If all goes well, you should now be able to access the guest machine services on the localhost port or private IP defined on the "Vagrantfile"
To access the machine via ssh you can do:

pre. $ vagrant ssh

Now you can see that the "/vagrant" folder of the machine is in sync with yout base project folder on the host machine.


* Stop the machine

pre. $ vagrant halt


* Destroy the machine

pre. $ vagrant destroy
